\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage{fullpage}
% \usepackage[left=3.0cm, right=2.5cm,top=2.0cm,bottom=2.5cm]{geometry}
\usepackage{enumerate}
%\usepackage{enumitem}
\usepackage{tabularx}
\usepackage{amsmath}

% \definecolor{dkgreen}{rgb}{0,0.6,0}
\usepackage{listings}
\usepackage{courier}
\usepackage{color}
\definecolor{mygreen}{rgb}{0,0.6,0}
\definecolor{mygray}{rgb}{0.5,0.5,0.5}
\definecolor{mymauve}{rgb}{0.58,0,0.82}

\usepackage[protrusion=true,expansion=true]{microtype} % Better typography

\lstset{
  language=bash,
  basicstyle=\small\ttfamily,
  captionpos=b,
  frame=none,
  literate=%
    {ö}{{\"o}}1
    {ä}{{\"a}}1
    {ü}{{\"u}}1
    {«}{{\guillemotleft}}1
    {»}{{\guillemotright}}1
}
\lstset{
  language=python,                % the language of the code
  backgroundcolor=\color{white},   % choose the background color
  basicstyle=\small\ttfamily,               % the size of the fonts that are used for the code
  breakatwhitespace=false,        % sets if automatic breaks should only happen at whitespace
  captionpos=b,                    % sets the caption-position to bottom
  breaklines=true,                % sets automatic line breaking
  showspaces=false,               % show spaces everywhere adding particular underscores; it overrides 'showstringspaces'
  showstringspaces=false,         % underline spaces within strings only
  showtabs=false,                 % show tabs within strings adding particular underscores
  commentstyle=\color{mygreen},   % comment style
  keywordstyle=\color{blue},      % keyword style
  stringstyle=\color{mymauve},     % string literal style
  numbers=left,
  stepnumber=1,
  frame=single,                   % adds a frame around the code
  frameround=,
  framerule=0.8pt,
}
\renewcommand{\labelenumi}{\alph{enumi}.}

\setlength\parindent{0pt} % Removes all indentation from paragraphs

%-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
% DOCUMENT INFORMATION
%-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\title{Overlay Networks, Decentralized Systems and Their Applications
\\Exercise 1}

\author{Raphael \textsc{Matile}\\12-711-222\\raphael.matile@uzh.ch
\and Samuel \textsc{von Baussnern}\\09-914-623\\samuel.vonbaussern@uzh.ch}
\date{\today} % Date for the report

\begin{document}

\maketitle % Insert the title, author and date

\section{Definitions and Characteristics}

\subsection{Define what is an «Overlay Network» in your own words, and give
examples of applications that have/may have an overlay network.}

An overlay network is a network built on top of another, already existing
network - called the underlay. Nodes in the overlay are connected by links,
either virtual or logical. Each of these links represent a path on the
underlying network. These paths are \textit{transparent} to the overlay.

P2P Applications such as BitTorrent use the Internet as an underlying network to
build their overlay network on top of it. VPN on top of IP.

\subsection{What is the difference between «overlay» and «underlay»? Why is
creating an overlay necessary?}

«Overlay» means a layer which is located on top of another layer. It lays
\textit{over} the other. «Underlay», by contrast, means exactly the opposite.
The layer is located below another.

Creating an overlay network might be necessary - for example - due to the use of
a different addressing scheme for the individual nodes.

\subsection{Discuss the following affirmation: «WhatsApp can be considered an
Overlay Network.» Do you agree/disagree? Explain the reasons.}

WhatsApp can be considered as an overlay network as each user\footnote{This
has recently changed, before that it was the telephone, not the user.}
represents an individual node which communicates with other nodes directly and
transparently.

Addressing in WhatsApp is done by using its phone number, although the internet
- the underlay for WhatsApp -  is used for the actual communication.

\section{Classification of P2P systems}

\subsection{A full decentralized system should have «self-organization» and
«direct interaction» properties. Why?}

\textit{Self-organisation} due to the possibility, that a particular node can
suddenly go off-line. If this node was a central service, a bottleneck, a
single-point-of- failure, and self-organisation would not be a requirement, then
parts of the network or its entireness would fail to maintain its demanded
service. A fully decentralized system should be able to recover from a loss of
any node.

It should use \textit{direct interaction} to limit its use of bandwidth, thus strengthening the stability and responsiveness of the system.

\subsection{Skype can be considered a pure P2P network or an hybrid P2P network?
Discuss the answer.}

Skype is a hybrid P2P network, because each node has to verify its login
credentials by a (centralized) authentication server. Once a user resp. node is
authenticated, Skype could be considered as a pure P2P network.

\subsection{In file-sharing P2P applications, how is search/lookup done in
«early» Napster (centralized)? And in Gnutella (flooding-based)? How about in
BitTorrent (tracker-based)? Explain each with few short sentences, including
at least one advantage and one disadvantage of each.}

\begin{description}

  \item[Napster]

  Has a centralized index, which provides a list of peers, which have the wanted
  file. Thus the lookup is - provided the central lookup server is live -
  guaranteed, fast and complete. It also provides a central managing and trust
  authority. The centralized lookup server is a single point of failure.

  \item[Gnutella]

  A search request gets forwarded until a specific defined search depth is
  reached (ttl) or the search request gets answered - this process is called
  flooding. If a node can answer the request, the search results are sent to the
  requesting peer - on the same way the request arrived, only in reverse. He can
  then download the file directly from the offering entity.

  This set-up results in a big effort to locate a particular file. Sadly it is
  not scalable as too many search requests can result in a Denial-of-service
  attack like behaviour. In addition the lookup can not be guaranteed, as the
  connection to every node is not guaranteed.

  \item[BitTorret]

  It is using a distributed hash table (DHT) for lookup of files. The network
  topology is formed such that for any key to a given hash, each node has a link
  to a node which owns the file to the key or a link to a node whose node ID is
  closer to the given key. Once there is no node with a ID closer to the key,
  the nearest node is reached which owns the file.

  This is highly scalable by automatically distributing loads to new nodes. Very
  similar data values can be at totally different nodes due to the hash
  function.

\end{description}

\section{P2P Applications}

\subsection{Discuss why NAT is considered an enemy of P2P systems.}

Due to the ability of hiding multiple nodes behind a single IP address, a node
can not be addressed directly any more. Which directly contradicts the
definition of a P2P network.

\subsection{Imagine a P2P application that has an accurate locality system, i.e.
that is able to identify the closest peers, considering “close” as the underlay
hop distance (IP) between two nodes. Discuss why this property may be desirable
by ISPs (Internet Service Providers).}

ISPs can reduce the workload each node has to do overall as well as reduce the
number of hops a packet needs to reach its target destination. Thus reducing the
used bandwidth, power consumption and increasing consumer satisfaction.

\subsection{If you were affiliated with a copyright enforcement authority, how
would you collect identities of users breaking copyright law, i.e. uploading
illegal content in Gnutella? Would you conclude that users of P2P networks are
generally less bound to be sued for distributing copyright-infringing material
than users of a C/S system, such as RapidShare? What would be the best strategy
for a user who does not want to get caught?}

One way to identify copyright breaking peers in Gnutella is by sending search
requests for files which are secured by copyright. Each peer which responds with
search  results could then be identified. Since the content cannot be checked by
a central authority corrupting the content with some sort of tracking device
(information, program, etc.) is simple and effective.

We would not conclude that P2P network users are generally less bound to be
sued. Governments or attorneys might monitoring a P2P network  much heavier than
a ordinary Client/Server service due to the knowledge that many users may use
such networks to share copyrighted material. But the effort which has to be done
to finally bring a user to justice might be higher than in a Client/Server
infrastructure,  where the operator of such a service could simply be bound by
law to prevent uploading copyrighted material.

A possible strategy to not get caught could include the use of VPNs through
multiple servers located in different countries. Because of that, one must work
together with multiple different laws of different countries to obtain some
information about an user. This is of course just another obstacle, and not a
final solution.

As ISPs in the USA have shown, each package over the IP layer can easily be
tagged - making a lot of security features not usable. But which shows that even
sophisticated anti-tracking devices and algorithms can easily be circulated.

\end{document}
